British prime minister Rishi sunak has
met with Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince
Muhammad bin Salman in the Saudi Capital
Riad this is his second stop on his
Middle East Tour which included a visit
to Israel sunak is pushing for
humanitarian Aid to be delivered into
Gaza as soon as
possible we also recognize that the
Palestinian people are victims of Hamas
too and that is why I welcome your
decision yesterday that you took to sure
that routs into Gaza will be opened for
humanitarian Aid to enter I'm glad that
you made that decision we will support
it we're increasing our Aid to the
region and we will look to get more
support to people as
quickly Al Mohamad jamj is in occupied
East Jerusalem Muhammad you've been
walking us through the ins and outs of
this visit between sunak and uh net who
now sunak is in Saudi Arabia what does
he hope to achieve on this tour
first and foremost sirel M prime
minister sunak would like to attempt to
deescalate this conflict it's one of the
things that was high on his agenda in
Israel it's one of the things that he's
been trying behind the scenes to get
some kind of guarantee from Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu he's
not gotten any public guarantees from
Netanyahu about that but he's now gone
on to Saudi Arabia he is going to go we
are told to Qatar and also to Turkey in
addition to Rishi sunak you also have UK
foreign secretary James cleverly who
will be accompanying sunak on this
Whirlwind Regional tour sunak wants
there to be a humanitarian Corridor he
wants to apply the kind of pressure that
he can to use the kind of levers that he
has to try to get Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu to agree not to
strike the Gaza Strip while a
humanitarian Corridor is open now as far
as we know it's tomorrow it's going to
be the earliest that these 20 a trucks
can actually get into the Gaza Strip but
as you were saying just a few moments
ago 20 trucks for a population of over 2
million that's just a drop in the bucket
sunak would like to see more Aid getting
through on a more regular basis he also
wants to make sure that British citizens
that are trapped inside of Gaza can
utilize the of crossing and get out of
Gaza and into Egypt but first and
foremost even though he has continued to
express solidarity with Israel he wants
more humanitarian Aid going in and
that's the biggest thing he's trying to
accomplish right now with this Whirlwind
Regional diplomacy sirel I'm Muhammad
jamun reporting live from occupied East
Jerusalem thank you very much for all of
that and setting up the conversation we
need to have with Marwan bishara uh
you're back with us Marwan look on the
Diplomatic front we've seen a lot of
movement over the last I'd say 36 hours
we saw Joe Biden in Israel we saw Rishi
sunak the British prime minister in
Israel now Rishi sunak in Saudi Arabia
and on the other side we're seeing the
King of Jordan in Egypt um I'm just
wondering what are you watching what
what you know for you is a Salient point
that you think has material impact on
the situation in Gaza going forward
look I think U President Biden has paved
the way for what is and is not possible
today in accordance uh to to
Washington's calculus and I think
everyone is just trying to paint his own
Corner along the way but the way has
been paved by the American president the
British prime minister um it saddens me
to say
uh is simply walking in his footsteps no
more no less of course you know it's a
it's tomato tomato so he's doing it with
an English accent with a British accent
that's all that's all it is it's more of
the same Biden except with an English
accent with a bit of more English um
junqua you know in the sense that they
would add a bit more language about
humanitarian this and that but in the
end of the day the parameters have been
defined by Joe Biden uh prime minister
sunak has no leverage whatsoever with
Israel and apparently clearly nowadays
with the Palestinians zero average zero
leverage so all he can do is simply
stress uh what President Biden did
except the way he does it it somehow
comes out to be a counterfeit or a fake
uh a fake message because Biden
delivered the original one right and now
what we have is a bit of a counterfeit
you European leaders trying to follow in
the footstep of the American president
instead of charting their own way Europe
is a 500 million people continent Europe
has the biggest Market in the world even
bigger than China and the United States
Europe is an economic power and a
strategic power UK and the EU should
have been able to come together within
their foreign policy outfits and be able
to chart a new way in Israel Palestine
but they don't we have the German
Chancellor doing his own song and dance
and then we have the British prime Min
prime minister and I think we're going
to have the French President coming soon
they are divided and they are weak
they're not speaking in one voice even
when the the the president of the
European European commission came she
faced criticism from Paris because she
went really all the way she became more
Zionist than Netanyahu so really Europe
and Britain is not playing the role that
should have been assigned to them that
they should have assigned sign to
themselves they're following in the
footsteps of the United States and I
think at the end of the day they are not
making much
difference Marwan you made me laugh with
the tomato tomato line I'm not against a
brief moment of levity in this war so so
thanks for that but more seriously um
what about diplomacy among the Arab
Nations because the question of the Arab
support for Palestinians what they're
actually willing to do for
Palestinians is one that has been
enduring and that goes right back to the
beginning the Israeli Palestinian
conflict so what do you make of
that you know the fact that um the
Jordanian Egyptian and the Palestinian
leaders have basically cancelled uh the
summit with Biden that was in and by
itself a kind of a huge step forward for
them right they even shocked the Arab
public opinion I don't know if you
remember but one hour before they did
that I was speaking on aler here and I
was saying you know if they really had
the guts that's what they need to do
they need to walk out they need to
threaten to boycott because if they do
you know they could at least maybe try
to impose a ceasefire well anyway they
did they did not get a ceasefire but
certainly it was a progress for them but
since then they have condemned uh
Israel's
bombardment and its bombing of the
hospital that's also you know important
because these countries have normalized
relations with
Israel Egypt and Jordan a long time ago
way before the Abraham Accords but even
countries that have uh normalized
relations and they were supposed to
normalized relations they are also
condemning Israel so we have a bit of a
you know change of tone change of policy
because of the heat because of the
pressure of the Arab public opinion
we've we've seen the streets and the
squares of the Arab world erupt in
protest against Israel and uh and
America support so I think we have now
the beginning
of an Arab diplomacy to try and somehow
deal with the crisis without being
overly embarrassed without being totally
irrelevant without facing more pressure
from the Arab state but when you when
you focus on the details if you heard
for example president Cece's uh press
conference yesterday and the way he
talked about um we don't want the
Palestinians to come to siai that's a
good thing but he said something about
you know take them to the neg desert in
the South Israel and then take them back
to Gaza you know I mean the you expect
the Egyptian president to say we cannot
take them in Egypt they should go back
to to Southern Israel right because they
are mostly refugees from Southern Israel
so in detail it's a bit problematic but
in the overall there is progress in The
Stance of Arab leaders Vis the
Palestinian questions as if they have
awakened okay that's really interesting
uh thank you for that we'll have to keep
watching that space then Maran bishara
joining us from London in this hour
thank you very much Marwan